Editorial Challenges and Solutions in Software Peer Review (#330)
ropensci/roweb3: content/blog/2022-04-14-software-review-editorial-challenges/index.md

## Recruiting reviewers

Reviewing a package takes precious time out of reviewers' busy schedules.
We hope the experience is also valuable for reviewers but we reckon that it's quite an undertaking, demanding about the same time as reviewing a scientific paper. 
To add to the difficulty of finding available reviewers, we have a list of [criteria for choosing reviewers](https://devguide.ropensci.org/editorguide.html#criteria-for-choosing-a-reviewer) to ensure diversity of reviewers (of skills, of people).

Last year we launched a [new form for reviewer volunteering](/blog/2021/11/18/devguide-0.7.0/#a-new-form-for-volunteer-reviewing) that allow us to collect finer-grained data about technical and topical expertise, as well as a binary optional question "Do you consider yourself part of an underrepresented group in the fields of data science, programming, or in your primary field of work?".
The collected data, coupled with Airtable filters, helps identifying potential reviewers.

When that is not enough, for instance after a few refusals or absences of answers, editors can ask for personal recommendations in our private editors channel.

> One last element that's been helpful is the sentence "If I don't hear from you within a week, I will assume you are unable to review at this time." in our [review request template](https://devguide.ropensci.org/reviewrequesttemplate.html), so everyone is on the same page as to how long to wait.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One challenge in reaching out to reviewers is knowing when to move on after waiting for a response.  So we've added "If I don't hear from you within a week, I will assume you are unable to review at this time." to our [standard review request template](https://devguide.ropensci.org/reviewrequesttemplate.html). This puts everyone is on the same page and provides clarity to editors and potential reviewers.
```

> ## Reviewers' dropping out 

Reviewer: I think this could expand a bit more with examples or color, and possibly combine it with the next section.

The goal is to not delay the review process too much.

## Authors' dropping out

It's a sadder state of affairs when package _authors_ stop responding, as the review process has to be stopped.
It's especially disappointing when it happens after reviews are in, as reviewers can feel their work is wasted.
Nothing can really prevent such a case, that can be out of anyone's control.

However, we've recently added sentences to (the development version of) the [author guide](https://devdevguide.netlify.app/authors-guide.html) and to the submission templates: "I expect to maintain this package for at least 2 years or to find a replacement."
This should prompt package authors to think about the package maintenance in the long term.
While this won't prevent all problems, this can't hurt.

Another effort we make is applying holding labels when that's needed, and revisiting them every three months, up to one year.
We also recommend authors make sure they receive their GitHub notifications as generally no communication is sent directly over email.

## Editors (and reviewers) work overload 

Software review necessitates work by all: editors, reviewers, and obviously authors.

> To reduce editorial work in particular, we've improved automation, which was the topic of a community call, ["Enhancing Software Peer Review with GitHub Automation"](/commcalls/dec2021-automation/): many tedious aspects, including exhaustive automatic checks of package quality, are now handled by a bot!

Reviewer: While this was partially covered elsewhere, I think we could expand on it here, so the post stands alone.

> Furthermore, we've been consistently replacing past editors and expanding the editorial team: we expect editors to handle [about 4 submissions a year](https://devdevguide.netlify.app/editorguide.html#editors-responsabilities) so the board size needs to be adjusted depending on the submission volume.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A huge part of limiting work editor load is having enough editors!  We have been expanding our editorial team [LINK TO NEW EDITOR POSTS], with the goal of only expecting editors to handle [about 4 submissions a year](https://devdevguide.netlify.app/editorguide.html#editors-responsabilities).  As our submissing volume grows, and editors rotate out (we ask for 2-year commitments with option to renew), we recruit new editors largely out of our pool of reviewers. We invite experienced reviewers to guest-edit and asking if they want to stay on if their reviewers work well.  If you want to try editing [start by volunteering as a reviewer](LINK)!
```
